1. de Freitas, G.V.; Silva, J.L.A.; Ribeiro, D.R.; Simioni, P.; Campbell, G.; Pireda, S.; Souza, A.F.; Nascimento, M.T.; Da Cunha, M.; Vitória, A.P. Functional trait patterns: Investigating variation-covariation relationships and the importance of intraspecific variability along distinct vegetation types. _Community Ecol._ 2024, 25, 221–236.
2. Wright, I.J.; Reich, P.B.; Westoby, M.; Ackerly, D.D.; Baruch, Z.; Bongers, F.; Villar, R. The worldwide leaf economics spectrum. _Nature_ 2004, 428, 821–827
3. Guimarães, G.C.; de Souza, J.P.; Silva, L.C.; Franco, A.C. Leaf economic spectrum and photosynthetic performance in Neotropical savanna tree species. _Funct. Plant Biol._ 2021, 48, 133–143.
4. Albert, C.H.; Thuiller, W.; Yoccoz, N.G.; Douzet, R.; Aubert, S.; Lavorel, S. A multi-trait approach reveals the structure and the relative importance of intra- vs. interspecific variability in plant traits. _Funct. Ecol._ 2010, 24, 1192–1201.
5. Fajardo, A.; Siefert, A. Intraspecific trait variation and the leaf economics spectrum across resource gradients and levels of organization. _Ecology_ 2018, 99, 1024–1030.
6. Janzen, D.H. Management of habitat fragments in a tropical dry forest: Growth. _Ann. Mo. Bot. Gard._ 1988, 75, 105–116.
7. Jiménez, Q.; Carrillo, E.; Kappelle, M. The Northern Pacific Lowland Seasonal Dry Forests of Guanacaste and the Nicoya Peninsula. In _Costa Rican Ecosystems_; Kappelle, M., Ed.; The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2016; pp. 247–289.
8. Sobrado, M.A. Cost-benefit relationships in deciduous and evergreen leaves of tropical dry forest species. _Funct. Ecol_. 1991, 5, 608–616.
9. Hulshof, C.M.; Swenson, N.G. Variation in leaf functional trait values within and across individuals and species: An example from a Costa Rican dry forest. _Funct. Ecol._ 2010, 24, 217–223.
10. Niklas, K.J; Cobb, E.D. Evidence for "diminishing returns" from the scaling of stem diameter and specific leaf area. _Am. J. Bot._ 2008, 95, 549-557. 
11. Vargas, G.G.; Brodribb, T.J.; Dupuy, J.M.; González-M, R.; Hulshof, C.M.; Medvigy, D.; Allerton, T.A.P.; Pizano, C.; Salgado-Negret, B.; Schwartz, N.B.; et al. Beyond leaf habit: Generalities in plant function across 97 tropical dry forest tree species. _New Phytol._ 2021, 232, 148–161.
12. Janzen, D.H. _Jacquinia pungens_, a heliophile from the understory of tropical deciduous forest. _Biotropica_ 1970, 2, 112–119
13. Avalos, G. Specific leaf area (SLA) serves as a proxy to predict total carbon content in understory individuals of the neotropical canopy palm Socratea exorrhiza. _Trees_ 2023, 37, 1831–1840.
14. Avalos, G.; Castillo, E.M.; Fernández, V.A.; Villalobos, E.Z.; Bermúdez, T.A. Population structure, light preferences, and late-wet season pre-dispersal fruit predation in _Bonellia nervosa_ (Primulaceae), a tropical dry forest understory tree with reverse phenology. Rev. Biol. Trop. 2025.
15. Avalos, G.; Frazer, K.; Le Gall, H. Plant size influences specific leaf area in palms: A case for the diminishing returns hypothesis. _Oecologia_ 2025, 207, 56.
16. Chaves, Ó.M.; Avalos, G. Do seasonal changes in light availability influence the inverse leafing phenology of the neotropical dry forest understory shrub _Bonellia nervosa_ (Theophrastaceae)? _Rev. Biol. Trop._ 2008, 56, 257–268.
17. Chaves, Ó.M.; Avalos, G. Is the inverse leafing phenology of the dry forest understory shrub _Jacquinia nervosa_ (Theophrastaceae) a strategy to escape herbivory? _Rev. Biol. Trop._ 2006, 54, 951–963.
18. Sánchez, O.; Quesada, M.; Dirzo, R.; Schlichting, C.D. A field experiment to determine the effect of dry-season irrigation on vegetative and reproductive traits in the wet-deciduous tree _Bonellia nervosa_. _J. Trop. Ecol._ 2020, 36, 29–35.
19. Pleban, J.R.; Guadagno, C.R.; Mackay, D.S.; Weinig, C.; Ewers, B.E. Rapid chlorophyll a fluorescence light response curves mechanistically inform photosynthesis modeling. _Plant Physiol._ 2020, 183, 602–619.
20. White, A.J.; Critchley, C. Rapid light curves: A new fluorescence method to assess the state of the photosynthetic apparatus. _Photosynth. Res._ 1999, 59, 63–72.
21. Martin, L. J; Blossey, B; Ellis E. Mapping where ecologists work: biases in the global distribution of terrestrial ecological observations. Fronteirs in ecology and in the environment. 2012. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1890/110154
